06-12-24 Novel writing what really matters
===

[00:00:00] Hey, how you doing? How you doing? How you doing? How you doing? You know, I grew up in New York, but I don't really have a classic New York accent. I know it's terrible. I kind of wish I did. I think it's probably my favorite accent in the world. I love a good New York accent. It's always jealous of those people that had one.

I can't say that any of them were really my friends. God, it's terrible. I've been working on episodes for this podcast for a while. And I even took a week off of writing my novel. I'm always working on a novel. So, if you don't know, I'm the author of, so far, six novels. And a half novels, a half because one of them is a novella that you can download for free from JackLively.

com. Oh, but anyway, that wasn't my point. It's just that I that's my, that's my job. That's [00:01:00] what I do. I'm a writer. Took some time off a week of a week off of writing to just focus on getting the podcast up and running and started and stuff. Now I've gotten back into it. What's weird about writing a novel, I mean, one of the weird things about writing a novel, of course, it's like one of the most fucking bizarre jobs you could possibly have.

But one of the weird things is that it's hard to get yourself into position to write it. Yeah. I mean, that's like almost the challenge itself is to get your ass in the chair and start writing. Anyways that brings me to the subject of today's episode, which is what really matters when you're writing a novel.

Now, the reason that I decided to, to work on that idea as the kind of the theme of this episode is because it seems to me that so many people focus on shit that really fucking doesn't matter, that won't help you, like it won't help you at all. When I was in film. There was [00:02:00] a book called Story by Robert McKee.

And this book was kind of like a Bible, not necessarily for writers. What was interesting about the situation was you imagine that you're a movie producer and your job is to first of all, decide, you know, the kind of like an executive producer, the kind of person, the money person whose job it is to To decide which projects should you finance and should, you know, should be produced.

And the only thing you have to go on is the actors involved. But of course you can adjust that, right? You can sort of like work on getting like Angelina Jolie or whatever actress involved. The money available, the director and that shit, and the script. And so, these producers would be totally interested, the reason that they were the massive main audience for this book's story by Robert McKee was because they didn't have any idea how to judge [00:03:00] a script.

I've read that book, Back to Front, a couple of times, and you know, at first I was enthralled with it because it's what everyone, everyone else was doing. But as I became a professional writer, a novelist who actually sells books, who has come to understand how, how this works in the mind of the reader, which kind of would translate in a movie to the mind of the viewer, right?

I now understand that like nothing that this guy, Robert McKee says, makes any sense or is important in any way. It's only interesting to me. If you're like a deconstructor of texts, if you're like an academic that wants to understand some deeply underlying, like, symbolic or mythological function of a story.

And by the way, that's there anyway. It's not something that the novelist or the screenwriter needs to think about, because it's kind of inherently impregnated into all stories that work. Right? So kind of the shortcut of what I'm going to tell you is that the thing needs to work, and if [00:04:00] it doesn't work, it sucks, and nobody's going to like it.

And if it does work, it's going to have, because it works, it's necessarily going to have all the elements that you want. require in a good story, which probably conforms to some version of like the analysis in Robert McKee's story. But on the reverse side, that stuff is not useful if you're creating a story.

What really matters when you're writing a novel? It's a little weird, but these days it seems that I run into aspiring authors online almost as much as I run into readers, and weirdly, often they're the same, avid readers who also want to be authors. Which makes a lot of sense because possibly the one prerequisite for writing well is reading copiously.

The fact is that there aren't a lot of people in the world that read. I don't know what percentage of America reads books, but I did hear this, the following [00:05:00] interesting statistical anecdote. The best selling novel in America, like, you know, New York Times number one bestseller, usually only reaches about 2 percent of the population, or something like that.

Which means that nobody is actually reading. So the idea that there would be a mass audience for reading actually doesn't exist. There is no mass audience for reading. When you consider that many readers want to write novels, many readers of novels also want to write novels, it begins to make sense, you know?

I probably spent the first decade and a half of my life just reading. So until, you know, 15 or even like 18, we had no TV in my house. And at the time there was no internet, so it was just books, books, books, and books, and books. In terms of source material, I had my dad's library downstairs in the basement.

Then I had the regular library, you know, the [00:06:00] town library. Then, if I was really, like, out of options, there was a convenience store called the Handy Store. The Handy Stop. It was called the Handy Stop. I think it was like attached to a gas station. Back then, there were book racks in convenience stores that were filled with trashy novels.

Like thrillers and westerns and romance. I don't remember reading any romance books. Mostly, what I was interested in was thrillers. Like, you know, noir thrillers, like hard boiled detective adventure, and, you know, thinking about it now, maybe there was some science fiction thrown in there. You know what I mean?

Anyway, let's get back on track. I've been writing for several years now, and because aspiring authors are so online these days, I'm always exposed to questions and unfortunately, I'm also exposed to some of the very bad advice that's out there. I mean, people give like courses on writing and they, they sort of like, you know, make long posts on how to write.[00:07:00] 

Now, I never respond to any of this stuff online because, you know, everyone's got their own methods and their own techniques and what works for me might not work for you. And what is obvious to me might be like really obscure and totally unuseful to you. I mean, I had that lesson teaching in the past that things that really make sense to me just don't click with the person I'm talking to.

But to me, the first thing that really matters when you're writing a novel is finishing it. Sad but true. Most people who start writing don't finish. And if you don't finish, you're not going to write your novel. Better to have a bad novel that you've written than a great novel that you haven't written.

At least you learn from a bad book, you know? I've got two books that were never published. They sit in a drawer called hope. That's metaphorical, my friend. It's metaphorical. There's no drawer called hope. My book's terrible. Have not been printed, actually they were, but I don't know where they are, but [00:08:00] they're in a folder on my computer and every once in a while I open them up and I look through it and I'm like, oh man, maybe there's something here, you know, maybe I could resurrect this and make it work, but I haven't done it yet.

Haven't done it yet. Not to say I won't ever do it, but sometimes things that are dead are just dead, man. Just gotta let it, let it, let it die. Let it rot. Anyway. Writing style and voice are important. Those are two important things. Remember the title of this little thing is what really matters when writing a novel.

So finishing matters, and then writing style and the voice that you use in your writing are important. And I'd say that these are the same thing. Writing style and voice are the same thing, at least functionally. Now, my favorite example of voice and style is from Elmore Leonard. He's a writer of fiction of, you know, thriller fiction, you know, mostly writing in the eighties.

I think it's a [00:09:00] late seventies, but mostly eighties. Well, he wrote Westerns like in the sixties and maybe even the fifties. Jesus, Elmore Leonard. Yeah, they're normally you don't, but if you don't know him, you should. It's a great interview that he did with Martin Amos, also an excellent writer, by the way.

I'm just going to snag a couple of quotes from the interview. So Amos says, I'm going to, I'm going to do an English accent. I want to ask you about your prose. Your prose makes Raymond Chandler look clumsy. Now the way to do it, or now the way I do it, I say the sentence in my head until nothing sticks out.

There are elbows. With you, it's all planed flat. How do you plane your prose into this wonderful instrument? Martin Amis using this sort of like you know, saying that some of his prose has elbows that he needs to kind of like It's kind of, kind of smooth out. Leonard says, I'm gonna try to do his like Detroit drawl.

First of all, I'm always writing from a point of view. I decide what the purpose of [00:10:00] the scene is and at least begin with some purpose. But even more important, from whose point of view is this scene seen? Because then, the narrative will take on somewhat the sound of the person who is seeing the scene.

And from his dialogue, that's what goes somewhat into the narrative. I start to write and I think, Upon entering the room, and I know I don't want to say upon entering the room, I don't want my writing to sound like the way we were taught to write, because I don't want you to be aware of my writing. I don't have the language.

I have to rely upon my characters. So, instead of writing upon entering the room, Leonard will start straight into a point of view. And here's a clip out of Leonard's book, Rum Punch. Ordell is a character who enters a bail bondsman's office. As you'll see, it's immediately from his point of view. There is no, Ordell entered the [00:11:00] room kind of bullshit.

This looked more like the man's den than a bail bond's office. A whole wall of shelves behind where Max Cherry sat with the books on it. All kinds of books. Some wood carved birds, some beer mugs. It was too neat and homey for this kind of scummy business. The man himself appeared neat, clean shaved, had his blue shirt open, no tie, good sized shoulders on him.

That dark, tough looking type of guy like Lewis. Dark hair. Only Max Cherry was losing his on top. Up in his fifties somewhere, he could be Italian, except Ordell had never met a bail bondsman wasn't Jewish. So curiously, Elmore Leonard begins with what could be a third person omniscient point of view. This looked more like the man's den than a bail bond office.

But it quickly turns into first person because [00:12:00] you're hearing Ordell speaking in his head. It was too neat and homey for this kind of scummy business. The man himself appeared neat, clean shaven, had his blue shirt open, no tie, good sized shoulders on him. Now clearly, these are Ordell's opinions now, right?

So the omniscient narrator probably wouldn't have an opinion on the nature of the bail bondsman's business. And Ordell thinks it's scummy. Now, the style that Leonard is using here is called free indirect discourse. And of course, Elmer Leonard is not the only well known author to write in free, indirect discourse.

Jane Austen, Virginia Woolf, Flaubert, Tolstoy, Kafka, many writers use this mode of address as a way of shifting from an omniscient narration to a more personal register, getting to the head of a character and seeing the [00:13:00] world from their point of view. And I do it myself, by the way, and love writing in that way.

When I was writing my fourth book, Hard Candy, I struggled with the third person, because I hadn't done it before, and it took me a while to find my voice, if you want. Of course, I ripped off Elmore Leonard. So here's an example of free, indirect discourse from Hard Candy. Candy moved around the room, sipping coffee.

She managed to make small talk with a woman who looked like a vampire. In the movies, vampires are immortal, frozen at the age they were bitten. If so, this woman had been bitten in her early fifties. Turned out she was the founder of a crypto company, developing an application for tallying votes. Candy listened to her detailed technical explanation of consensus rules, and managed to drift away gracefully.

Now the danger here Is that if you're writing in free indirect discourse, you might want to head hop. Like if the next [00:14:00] paragraph that I wrote in hard candy was in that crypto woman's head, you'd be head hopping. And so you want to keep each chapter or section to a single character's perspective, if you use this free indirect discourse.

So that's just one example of a voice and style that I think you can probably agree is important to consider when you are writing a novel.

Another thing that really matters when you're trying to write a decent novel is character. And Elmore Leonard said something interesting in that little interview snippet about character. He said, I don't want you to be aware of my writing. I don't have the language. I have to rely upon my characters.

Which I agree with, and I think provides a key to understanding what character actually is, and what it's not. Elmore Leonard again, I don't want you to be aware of my writing. I don't [00:15:00] have the language. I have to rely upon my characters, right? So what does character do? Now clearly, Fictional narratives are about people doing things and interacting with each other, or at least they should be, even when it's animals, like in, in Animal Farm.

The animal characters need to be anthropomorphized for the book to engage a human reader, right? I mean, the book isn't for pigs and dogs and cows and sheep. It's for humans to read, and the animals are kind of a, you know, metaphorical. So, in that sense, all narration, you know, any kind of story, all narration emerges from people acting, doing actions, and interacting.

And the actions and interactions of People, or characters, have two results. Now, one is the [00:16:00] creation of plot. In a well written novel, plot is revealed and inferred from the actions and interactions of characters. The people in the story do things, and story is not just something that happens to them. It's always much more engaging and surprising when plot emerges from characters actions.

The actions that people perform in the course of a narrative has a second effect after plot, which is the creation of character. It's one thing to have a character named Lily, but at what point does she truly become a character? At what point can you say about Lily, What a character. Lily is such a character.

You see the relation, you know, Oh, she's such a character. And it's a character in your book. Right? So people [00:17:00] become characters when they do surprising things. But not when they do only surprising things, unless your character is like insane or something. Right? So usually a character is a person who's accumulated actions in the story.

Demonstrated a certain consistency, right? Like they've got a kind of habitual way of doing things in the story. And once you develop this consistency, you can break it with the surprise when they do something different, right? When the character does something differently, maybe she does something Once Lily has demonstrated consistency by, say, ordering two eggs over easy with bacon and hash browns, well done with a side of rye toast, unbuttered please with black coffee, for three mornings in a row at the diner, well, you can deepen her as a character.

And you could indicate that something's going on by having her order a poached egg with Tabasco sauce on the [00:18:00] side and a chocolate milkshake on day four. So you set up consistency in order to generate surprise, which as we can see, can easily become a plot point. If the author is paying attention to this kind of thing, maybe she's pregnant, or maybe she's about to kill her roommate.

Who knows? Character is important to consider. And as we can see from the Elmore Leonard example of style and voice, both voice and character can be brought together. The other thing that's important is setting. Now the setting is in some ways a kind of character, right? Now, one way that this manifests itself is in the fact that characteristics of a particular place can have like an can, can have agency in some way.

For example, consider that you're in a place where it's common to have really high winds in the winter, or when it can [00:19:00] snow for a week at a time. Or, it's a mountainous region where it's really tough to travel between villages. And these characteristics force and constrain the actions of your characters.

In this sense, the landscape itself becomes a character that has kind of agency on their own, because the high winds can make it too dangerous to drive. The snow can obliterate roads and trails and make it really easy to get lost. And then the steep mountains are really suitable for locals and really terrible for outsiders who don't know their way.

So the locals have a big advantage in the conflict or anything that might arise. You see what I'm saying? So the setting and the landscape are characters. And weather is part of that, of course. But just Just don't talk about weather too much, unless it's doing something, right? It's very famous that you're not supposed to begin the book with the weather, okay?

Just [00:20:00] telling you this. Don't begin with the weather. It was not a dark and stormy night. Maybe you've noticed that I'm not mentioning plot by itself. We can take care of the question of plot by talking about voice. And once we've spoken about those things, we've actually almost already spoken about plot.

Because what more is there to say? The plot is It's actually just what people do. What people do actually accumulates and makes up their character, right? We're going to leave plot for another day. What we didn't discuss is structure and backstory. Because there isn't so much to discuss, because those things don't fucking matter.

I'm being a little flippant here, because structure exists, of course, by default, and if it's terrible, it means your book sucks. What I mean by. structure doesn't matter and it's not important to discuss is that [00:21:00] the novel on its own without you even having to think about it is a linear form. So it's got a beginning and it's got an end by its very nature and by that nature it's going to have a middle.

Right, so you can't actually write something that doesn't have a middle and doesn't have a beginning and doesn't have an end Because a novel starts from like page one and it ends on like page 450, right? I'm gonna suggest to you that it isn't even important to think too hard about that because yes, the book needs to begin huh, and it needs to end and yep in between those things a middle is gonna appear But do you really have much control over that?

I think all you need to do is It's focus on the other stuff, make the other stuff good, make the characters do things that are interesting and interact with each other in interesting ways that make up a plot, right? So you focus on the important stuff and [00:22:00] make that good and you actually complete the fucking mission and you finish writing the novel.

Or play or script or whatever. And then you're good and you have two weeks off and you start the next one. Well, it's raining in London. It's pitter pattering. It's not spinning. It's not raining cats and dogs. And it's not even drizzling because drizzle implies small little drops in a fine kind of, you know, in a, it's not a mist cause a mist is another thing, but it's a kind of a drizzle.

You know, very fine drops, but the pitter pattering are relatively fatter drops that kind of just land once in a while, you know, you can walk, you can kind of dodge when I go outside right now, I'll probably dodge the raindrops now, in case you were bummed out that I didn't talk about geopolitics. Just now, I'm going to fix that for you because in the past week.

What's actually happened, geopolitically, is interesting. So [00:23:00] sticking to my theme, as usual, of the Middle East, we've had a resurgence of the Syrian civil war. Now everyone sort of thought, me included, that it was sort of over and assumed that the Assad regime had won, but it turns out that as soon as any kind of weakness is sort of sniffed, or like spotted, in the Middle East.

In the Levant, particularly the Levant, the slightest weakness is exploited. So because Israel seems to have smashed the shit out of Hezbollah and Iran, the weakness of the Assad regime was noticed. and taken advantage of by a Turkish sponsored bunch of opposition rebels, you know, some kind of Al Qaeda offshoot, Salafist Sunni Islamists, sponsored by the Salafist Sunni Muslim Brotherhood related Turkish [00:24:00] regime.

Crazy people. They've taken advantage of the weakness of the Assad regime and they're like driving through the territory and murdering and killing. killing and like, yeah, you know, toppling statues again and like raising flags and stepping on flags and, you know, the usual stuff. It's just curious to see the return of this and the reopening of this Syrian situation to put to bed the, the, the sort of the fiction, the legal fiction that a state of Syria exists.

So, people focus on, on Israel and Palestine, they love this, they think this is like some kind of secure set of concepts that they can hold on to and identify with, like, I am interested in the Middle East and I am very much for Palestine. The situation in Syria is such that you can see that being for any kind of like fantastical entity that doesn't actually have a grip on power is a bit foolish.[00:25:00] 

I'm not saying I have anything against the Palestinian people. I really don't. I really wish them stability, peace, and great lives. But what you can see in Syria is that it's not enough to have a flag and representation in the UN as a sovereign state. So Syria is represented in the UN, it's a sovereign state, it's got a flag, it's probably got a national anthem.

But none of that fucking matters. When some bunch of Islamists, al Qaeda offshoots supported by Turkey, can just come driving through your borders and take over the second biggest city in Syria, there is a big disjunction between what actually exists on the ground and the legal fictions of the international, the so called international community.

And I find that really interesting in regard to all kinds of things like international law and the ICC and basically the way that that people are sort of propagandized into thinking about [00:26:00] geopolitics. I'm not sure it's productive to think about it. In this, in the ideal way, it's probably much better to come to terms with with the reality of what's actually going on on the ground.

If you want some traction on a way of making stability for the people that live there. Because in the end, the bottom line, it doesn't really matter. For most people, it doesn't matter under what flag they live. As long as they can live a sort of stable existence in a place which has you know, rules that everybody knows that are not.

and is run by people who are relatively competent and are not just like stealing all the money. The Syrian Civil War opened back up. It showed the divisions between, I would say roughly three or four different groups in the Middle East, strategic groupings. One of which is the Turkish led kind of Turkish and Qatar led Salafist Sunni group of Islamists.

Which includes Al Qaeda, offshoots like Nusra, and the current one that's driving through Syria. [00:27:00] A second grouping is the Iranian Shiite, like Hezbollah, Iran the Assad regime sponsored by Russia. That's another grouping entirely. Oh, and of course, Hamas was famously kind of like in between. All these groupings, because it was, it was sort of allied to the Iranian group and allied to the Turkish group, because basically all those groups just hate the Jews.

Anyways, Hamas fucked them all up by starting the war on October 7th. At first they thought this was a great victory and people on social media loving this, but now because the Hezbollah and the Shia axis got hammered, it's just opening up all hell. So the question remains, what is left of the third group?

Which is the Israel, Egypt, Saudi, and UAE kind of like, you know, Abraham's Accord, Abraham Accords alliance. I don't know. This remains to be seen. And I think people just sort of gravitate, you know, in this, in that region, [00:28:00] they gravitate to actual power. So we're going to see. Anyway, there's your geopolitics.

I hope you liked 

[00:29:00] it.

